---
layout: post
title: Codegen units in the Rust compiler
---

This post describes some performance work I have been doing recently on rustc.
I spent several weeks on a particular problem with only a small amount of
success. I hope a write-up will be interesting and educational, and may even
lead to suggestions that make things better. The post is aimed at readers with
some familiarity with compilers.

## Codegen Units

rustc compiles Rust code down to a representation called MIR, and then performs
code generation, converting the MIR into LLVM IR, which is then passed to LLVM,
which generates machine code.

LLVM can provide coarse-grained parallelism by processing multiple chunks of
LLVM IR in parallel. rustc uses this to speed up Rust compilation. We call
one of these chunks a *codegen unit* (CGU).

### Non-incremental builds

In a non-incremental build rustc splits the code by default into up to 16 CGUs.
Consider this screenshot from a [samply](https://github.com/mstange/samply/)
profile of rustc compiling the `image-0.24.1` crate:

![Samply screenshot, image-0.24.1, debug full build](/images/2023/07/11/image-0.24.1-Debug-Full.png)

Time is on the x-axis, and each horizontal line represents a thread. The main
thread is shown at the top, labelled with the PID. It is active at the start
just long enough to spawn another thread labelled `rustc`. The `rustc` thread,
shown at the bottom, is active for most of the execution. There are also 16
LLVM threads labelled `opt cgu.00` through to `opt cgu.15`, each one active for
a short period of time. 

The period of execution involving the LLVM threads can be considered the
back-end, which is parallel. Everything before that is the front-end. There is
a parallel front-end under development, but rustc's current front-end is
completely serial.

The staircase shape formed by the left-hand side of the LLVM threads is because
the `rustc` thread does the MIR-to-LLVM-IR conversion one CGU at a time, and the
LLVM thread for a CGU cannot be spawned until that conversion is complete. The
LLVM threads run for varying lengths of time. (More about that later.) The
`rustc` thread is active the entire time except a short stretch near the end,
when it has finished producing LLVM IR for all the CGUs and is waiting for the
last few LLVM threads to finish; it then does a small amount of work at the
very end.

A decent amount of parallel execution is evident in the second half, with a
peak of around seven threads active at the same time. If those LLVM threads
instead had to execute serially it would take a lot longer. In fact, we can
observe this by setting the
[`codegen-units`](https://doc.rust-lang.org/rustc/codegen-options/index.html#codegen-units)
value to 1 in `Cargo.toml`, which results in this profile:

![Samply screenshot, image-0.24.1, debug full build, single CGU](/images/2023/07/11/image-0.24.1-Debug-Full-Cgu1.png)

In this case there is a single LLVM thread. When it runs the `rustc` thread is
inactive. (The main thread is blank in this screenshot. I think this is because
no samples were taken during its short period of activity.)

Execution with a single CGU is fully serial and takes 9.7s, more than twice the
4.5s for the earlier run. A big difference! But the speed from parallelism
comes at a cost.
- Splitting and recombining the CGUs takes a certain amount of work, so the
  number of cycles executed is higher, as is the energy use.
- Peak memory usage is higher.
- The compiled binary is larger and the code quality is lower, because LLVM
  does a worse job when processing code chunks in isolation, instead of all at
  once.

For many people the first two items won't matter much, and for debug builds the
last item might also not matter much. But for release builds the lower code
quality is a big deal. Enough so that in release builds rustc gets LLVM to
perform a subsequent step called "thin local LTO" that greatly improves the
code quality. Here is a profile for a release build of the same crate:

![Samply screenshot, image-0.24.1, release full build](/images/2023/07/11/image-0.24.1-Opt-Full.png)

I had to zoom out in Firefox to fit the entire profile into a single
screenshot. The left two thirds is similar to the debug profile, but the right
third shows sixteen additional threads labelled `lto cgu.00` through to `lto
cgu.15`. These are the thin local LTO threads. They can't start until all the
`opt` threads are finished, but then they can all start at the same time
because the `rustc` thread doesn't need to do any extra work. So we get 16
threads active in parallel for part of that period.

Setting `codegen-units` to 1 gives even better code quality than thin local
LTO, but takes longer. Some authors of binary rust crates always use that
setting for release builds because they are willing to accept the
extra compile times for the highest code quality.

Finally, note that rustc uses the
[`jobserver`](https://docs.rs/jobserver/latest/jobserver/) crate to rate-limit
the spawning of threads so it won't overload the machine. This is important
when you are building a large project with Cargo and multiple rustc processes
are compiling different crates at the same time.

### Incremental builds

Incremental builds use much smaller CGUs, up to 256 by default. This is because
if anything about a CGU has changed since the previous compilation, LLVM must
reprocess the entire CGU. So we want fine-grained CGUs to minimize the amount
of work LLVM must do when small changes are made to the code. This compromises
code quality, but incremental builds are only used by default for debug builds,
where code quality is less important.

I won't show a profile of an incremental build because it is hard to get a good
screenshot showing hundreds very short-running threads, but you can probably
imagine what it looks like.

Instead of spawning one thread per CGU in this case, rustc could instead spawn
a smaller number of threads and reuse each one for multiple CGUs. This is
probably a good idea, though the current structure of the code makes it easier
to spawn a thread for every CGU.

## CGU formation

So how are these CGUs actually formed? 

Roughly speaking, a Rust program consists of many functions, which form a
directed graph, where a call from one function to another constitutes an edge.
We need to split this graph into pieces (CGUs), which is a [graph
partition](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Graph_partition) problem. We want to
create CGUs that are roughly equal in size (so they take about the same length
of time for LLVM to process), and also minimize the number of edges between
them (because that makes LLVM's job easier and results in better code quality).

Actually, because of the staircase effect we saw above, we don't want the CGUs
to be exactly the same size. The ideal case would be if there was a slight
gradient in CGU size that matched the staircase gradient. That way, all CGUs
would finish processing at exactly the same time, for maximum parallelization.

Graph partitioning is an NP-hard problem. There are several common algorithms
which are moderately complex to implement. rustc instead does something much
simpler. It starts by simply creating one CGU per Rust module: every function
in a module is put into the same CGU. Then, if the numbers of CGUs exceeds the
limit (by default 16 for non-incremental builds and 256 for incremental builds)
it repeatedly merges the two smallest CGUs until the limit is reached. This
approach is simple, fast, and takes advantage of domain-specific knowledge in a
useful wayâ€”program modules tend to provide good natural boundaries.

All this relies on a way to measure CGU size. Currently we use the number of
MIR statements in the CGU to estimate how long it will take LLVM to process the
CGU. (More on this later.)

There is a large design space here, with many other possible ways of forming
and ordering CGUs. The next section will explore some of the alternative
approaches that I tried.

## What I tried

### The number of CGUs (part 1)

The first thing I tried was changing the default number of CGUs for
non-incremental builds from 16, but 16 seemed like something of a local
optimum.

[#111666](https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/pull/111666): I then tried reducing
the default number of CGUs for incremental builds from 256 to 128 and 64. This
gave significant improvement to speed and binary size for two kinds of
incremental builds: building the first time, and rebuilding with no changes.
But for incremental rebuilds involving small code changes there were a few
cases where compilation was 4-10x slower! It turns out more coarse-grained CGUs
means that when things change, LLVM needs to do more work. This won't be
surprising to anyone who has read the previous section, but at this early point
it was a surprise to me. So I closed this PR, leaving the default at 256.

### CGU merging (part 1)

[#111712](https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/pull/111712): Next I tried
improving the CGU merging algorithm. The goal when merging is to create CGUs
that are similar in size, which is a [multiway number
partitioning](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Multiway_number_partitioning)
problem. Currently rustc repeatedly merges the two smallest CGUs until the
number of CGUs is low enough. This is actually a really bad algorithm! An
analogy: when filling the trunk of a car with many items you should place the
largest items first, because they are the hardest to place, and place the
smallest items last, because they are the easiest to place and can fit in the
remaining gaps. The same intuition applies to CGU merging: repeatedly merging
the smallest CGUs is exactly the wrong thing to do.

For example, here are the CGU sizes for a release build of `cargo-0.60.0`,
which is a large crate: 314620, 186393, 175303, 159304, 154652, 150888, 143173,
141119, 134430, 129427, 127643, 121790, 116463, 109474, 109074, 100381. The
average size is 148383, but you can see there is quite a spread around that.

[#111712](https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/pull/111712): So I tried changing
rustc to repeatedly merge the Nth and (N+1)th largest CGUs, where the largest
CGU has an index of 1, and N is the CGU limit. The intuition here is that when
you have more than N CGUs, at least one of the N biggest CGUs will need to
grow. So we pick the smallest of the largest N CGUs (i.e. the Nth CGU) as the
merge destination because it has the most room for growth. Then we pick the
largest of the remaining CGUs (i.e. the (N+1)th CGU) as the merge source
because it's the hardest to place. This algorithm is as simple as repeatedly
merging the two smallest CGUs, but it gives much better results as measured by
the spread of the resulting CGU sizes. Unfortunately, it made actual compile
times, memory usage, and binary sizes all marginally worse, which was a
surprise. So I closed this PR as well.

### CGU splitting

[#111900](https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/pull/111900): At this point I
thought I understood why the better merging algorithm gave bad results:
compilation time would be dominated by the largest CGU, and better merging
usually doesn't affect that CGU. So I tried splitting the largest CGUs and
further tweaking how merging works. The performance results were absolutely
terrible, which was a strong indication that (a) module boundaries are worth
respecting, and (b) my hypothesis was wrong.

### CGU processing order

[#111937](https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/pull/111937): I then tried a minor
change to the CGU processing order, which had negligible effect.

An aside: the profiles above show execution when we compile the CGUs in order
from largest estimated size to smallest. In practice, rustc does something
slightly different: it does the largest, then the smallest, then the second
largest, then the second smallest, and so on. This was found in the past to
slightly reduce peak memory usage without affecting speed. But for the profiles
in this blog post I modified the compiler to use the largest-to-smallest order
because that gives profiles that are easier to understand.

### CGU formation

[#112093](https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/pull/112093): I then thought that
it might help to "massage" the CGUs a little before merging, by moving
functions from one CGU to another in some cases. For example, if a leaf
function (i.e. one that doesn't call any other functions) called `f` in CGU A has a
single caller `g` in CGU B, then it makes sense to move `f` from A to B, thus
removing an inter-CGU edge. (There are other similar cases involving non-leaf
functions that make sense to move as well). I implemented this and it gave some
moderate improvements, but I am currently undecided whether it is worth the
extra complexity.

While implementing this I also spent some time visualizing the call graphs. I
started with GraphViz. The graphs looked nice for very small programs, but for
larger programs they rapidly became impossible to read and navigate. I
[complained](https://mas.to/@nnethercote/110653359668399807) about this on
Mastodon and got a suggestion to use d2, which is slower but gives somewhat
more readable graphs. Here is the graph for a toy program prior to massaging,
with nine CGUs:

![Call graph, toy program, pre-massaging](/images/2023/07/11/toy-graph-pre.svg)

Here is the graph for the same program after massaging, where it has dropped to
five CGUs.

![Call graph, toy program, post-massaging](/images/2023/07/11/toy-graph-post.svg)

Unfortunately the layout is quite different, which complicates comparisons to
the first graph.

And here is the graph for `serde-1.0.136` after massaging:

![Call graph, serde 1.0.136, post-massaging](/images/2023/07/11/serde-1.0.136-graph-post.svg)

Even though `serde` is only moderately-sized, this graph is at the outer limit
of what is readable in a browser with SVG output.

I am aware of tools such as Gephi and igraph that are designed to handle very
large graphs, but I couldn't find one that could handle nested graphs, which I
needed for the CGUs. The state of the art in call graph visualization seems
grossly underpowered. Maybe I'm overlooking something?

### Inlining

One thing I haven't mentioned until now is that inlined functions are treated
differently to non-inlined (root) functions. Each root function is placed in
exactly one CGU, but any inlined function is placed in every CGU that contains a
root function that the inlined function is reachable from. LLVM requires this,
and it means inlined functions can be duplicated in multiple CGUs.

Furthermore, the placement of inlined functions happens after the placement of
root functions. Which makes sense. What makes less sense is that CGU merging
occurred *before* inline function placement. Which means that the size
estimation that guides CGU merging didn't take inlined functions into account.
Which is a big deal, especially for release builds, where inlined functions are
very common.

[#112375](https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/pull/112375): So I did the obvious
thing and moved inlining before CGU merging. Surely this would give better
results, because the size estimates would be better? Alas, no. Once again, the
performance results were no better, perhaps marginally worse.

[#112695](https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/pull/112695): Later on this problem
was confounding some additional attempts to improve the size estimates (more on
that later) so I ended up doing it anyway. It did make the code slightly
simpler.

### The number of CGUs (part 2)

[#112441](https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/pull/112441): Earlier I tried
reducing the maximum number of CGUs for incremental builds from 256 to 128 and
64, and found that this sometimes gave bad results when rebuilding after small
changes because larger CGUs needed to be redone. Then I thought of doing the
opposite, i.e. removing the upper limit on CGUs altogether for incremental
builds. In practice, the 256 limit is only reached for quite large crates.
Which means the limit artificially reduces the effectiveness of incremental
compilation for these large crates. And for no obvious benefit, other than
avoiding a large number of threads.

At the time of writing, this PR is still open and in an uncertain state.

### A minimum CGU size

At this point one thing was clear: having fewer CGUs results in smaller
binaries, better code quality, and less memory usage, at the cost of sometimes
increasing compile times. However, when a CGU is very small the speed gained
from parallelism is correspondingly very small, or even zero, due to there
being some overhead in creating a CGU and starting a new thread.

[#112448](https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/pull/112448): So I tried
introducing a minimum CGU size and it gave good results. Finally, a success!
Good improvements on memory use, binary size, and cycles, and roughly neutral
results on walltimes. This change mostly benefits small crates, sometimes
reducing the number of CGUs to one. In contrast, large crates are likely to
have CGUs that all naturally exceed the minimum threshold.

### CGU merging (part 2)

[#112648](https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/pull/112648): The previous PR's
success showed that reducing the number of CGUs can be a clear win in some
cases. So I tried a related idea: be more aggressive about merging CGUs for
non-incremental buildsâ€”going beyond what was required for both the CGU count
limit and the minimum CGU sizeâ€”so long as the resulting CGUs don't become
bigger than the biggest existing CGU. But the performance results were poor,
largely because the size estimates are sometimes poor, as the next section will
describe.

### Better size estimates

At this point I realized a major problem: the CGU size estimates just aren't
very good. Both overestimates and underestimates are common, and factors of two
or more aren't unusual. E.g. the compiler might estimate two CGUs as being the
same size, but one might take twice as long as the other for LLVM to process.

For example, consider this profile of a debug build of `regex-1.5.5`:

![Samply screenshot, regex-1.5.5, debug full build](/images/2023/07/11/regex-1.5.5-Debug-Full.png)

Moving from top to bottom we would hope that the LLVM thread durations get
smaller, but this is far from true. CGUs 03 and 11 are particularly badly
underestimated, and we end up waiting for their threads long after all the
others have finished.

I think this explains why a lot of my previous attempts didn't improve
anything. For example, there's no point introducing clever merging algorithms
if the CGU sizes directing the merging are inaccurate. This inaccuracy
effectively smothers the entire CGU formation process in a thick layer of
randomness, which makes it hard to improve.

So I decided to quantify the size estimate error. I compared the CGU size
estimates against the actual time taken by LLVM to process the CGUs, and came
up with a measure of the error based on the [mean absolute
deviation](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Average_absolute_deviation).

(An aside: when measuring forecasting errors, normally you forecast an amount
using a particular metric, and then you measure the outcome with the same
metric, and then compute the error using the difference. But CGU size estimates
are different. They don't predict in absolute terms, such as milliseconds, how
long a CGU will take to compile. Instead, they are effectively a relative
measure. A single CGU size estimate is little use in isolation; it only becomes
useful in relation to one or more other CGU size estimates. This means many
common measures of error such as mean-squared can't be used.)

This gave me a measure of error for the CGU size estimates, which meant I could
try other estimation functions for comparison. But how to improve the
estimation? It's very difficult to accurately estimate how long a chunk of code
will take to compile. There are *many* possible characteristics of the code
that could affect things. As I mentioned earlier, currently the estimate is
based on the number of MIR statements in the CGU. I thought that the number of
functions might also be relevantâ€”e.g. lots of small functions might be faster
or slower to process than a few large functionsâ€”but I couldn't find a better
estimation function that way. (I did find a few that gave obviously *worse*
results, though!)

[#113407](https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/pull/113047): Then I tried an
estimation function that uses the number of [basic
blocks](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Basic_block). This gave much lower errors
than estimating based on the number of statements. Which makes a certain amount
of sense, given that basic blocks are straight-line code that are fairly easy
for compilers to process, and it's the control flow represented by edges
between basic blocks that cause a lot of the complexity. I was hopeful at this
point, but the performance results were underwhelming, and it's not clear that
the change is worth merging. Yet again.

This was disappointing. I think the problem is that even with better estimates
on average, it just takes one bad estimate to mess things up. Particularly if
the bad estimate is an underestimate, as we saw with `regex-1.5.5` above.
Imagine if the compiler produced 16 CGUs all with the same size estimate, and
15 of them took the same amount of time while one of them took twice as long.
That slow one would be the "long pole" that messes everything up.

In fact, this might explain why some of my earlier attempts at improved merging
algorithms gave poor results. The current sub-optimal merging algorithm results
in CGUs with a range of size estimates, some larger, some smaller. That
unevenness can accommodate moderate underestimates for all of the CGUs except
for the largest one or two. In contrast, if all the CGUs are the same size, the
situation is more brittle, and an underestimate for any CGU could mess things
up.

Ultimately, I think the inaccuracy of the size estimates is the limiting factor
for this entire CGU formation problem. If we had perfect size estimates we
could do things a lot better. Throwing machine learning at the estimation
problem is a possibility, but I fear that it would still be difficult to come
up with an estimation function that is (a) comprehensible and (b) accurate
across many different machines. Despite my experiments, it's not clear to me
what characteristics of the MIR code should even be considered by the
estimation function. Also, there are two other experimental rustc back-ends
(one using Cranelift, and one using GCC) and it's not clear if an estimation
function that works well for LLVM would also work well for them.

Another idea is to record the actual time taken per CGU and use that to guide
future estimates. But this would introduce a large source of non-determinism
into compilation. Imagine doing a release build of a Rust program twice in a
row on a single machine, or on two different machines, and getting different
binaries each time? It would be the exact opposite of [reproducible
builds](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Reproducible_builds).

### The number of CGUs (part 3)

Just before publishing this post, I tried one final thing based on a question
from Jakub BerÃ¡nek:

> I wonder if we oversubscribe though - do we still generate 16 threads in
> parallel if you only have 2 cores?

The answer to this question is "yes". rustc doesn't consider the number of
cores when choosing the CGU limit.

[#113555](https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/pull/113555): So I tried a simple
change to limit the number of CGUs for non-incremental builds to the number of
machine cores. For example, the CI machine we use for performance evaluation
has 12 cores, so the maximum number of CGUs would be 12 instead of 16. This
change gave great results for cycle counts and binary size, as expected. But it
greatly increased walltimes and maximum memory use for some benchmarks, which
was a surprise. I think the walltime result might be explained by the staircase
effect we saw above: with 12 cores and 16 CGUs we actually don't oversubscribe.
rustc never gets more than seven or eight LLVM `opt` threads running in
parallel (e.g. the first LLVM `opt` thread finishes well before the 12th can
start) so we get the usual "fewer, larger CGUs result in longer walltimes"
result. On a machine with just two or four cores we probably do oversubscribe
and so this change might be more beneficial.

### Other improvements

Even though my efforts were mostly unsuccessful, performance-wise, there were
some other benefits. First, I did a lot of refactoring and code cleanups while
trying things out, in
[#111899](https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/pull/111899),
[#112053](https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/pull/112053),
[#112128](https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/pull/112128),
[#112162](https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/pull/112162),
[#112369](https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/pull/112369),
[#112639](https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/pull/112639),
[#112827](https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/pull/112827),
[#112830](https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/pull/112830),
[#112913](https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/pull/112913), and
[#113390](https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/pull/113390).

I also improved the debugging output that rustc can produce about CGUs, which
is useful for both debugging and profiling purposes, in
[#111743](https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/pull/111743),
[#112155](https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/pull/112155), and
[#112946](https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/pull/112946).

## Conclusion

This is a real tar pit of a problem. The use of CGUs involves many trade-offs
between compile speed, memory use, energy use, binary size, and code quality. I
tried many things, and most of them failed. In a lot of cases wins on one
metric were balanced or outweighed by losses on another. The
improvement-to-effort ratio on this one was really low. Performance tuning of
parallel code can be really hard. 

*Thank you to Wesley Wiser for reviewing most of the mentioned PRs, and to
Jakub BerÃ¡nek and RÃ©my Rakic for providing comments on a draft version of this
post.*
