---
layout: post
title: My new job
---

I am happy to announce that I have joined a new startup called
[VectorWare](https://vectorware.com/). The linked website is currently very
bare-boned, but the company aims to use Rust to improve the state of GPU
programming.

This job is not a "work full-time on the Rust compiler" position like my last
one. But it will involve a lot of open source work, some Rust compiler work,
and I will continue to be a Rust compiler team member and maintainer. I will
also get to learn about GPU programming, a new area for me. Indeed, my main
accomplishment in my first week was to write Rust code that uses the GPU to
render the company logo.

<p align="center">
  <img title='The VectorWare logo, which consists of twelve nested and
  overlapping triangles of different sizes. Each triangle has one red corner,
  one green corner, and one blue corner. All together the triangles form a
  stylised "VW".'
  src="/images/2025/09/16/vectorware-logo.png" width=400>
</p>

Back in July I
[wrote](https://nnethercote.github.io/2025/07/18/looking-for-a-new-job.html)
that I was looking for a new job. There has been some
[public](https://mp.weixin.qq.com/s/-RHfqLqeMcgHmTclY0EqqQ)
[speculation](https://x.com/skydotcs/status/1961989153253675164) about the lack
of a follow-up post and what that meant. Was I having trouble finding a new
job? If so, what does that mean for Rust? What does it suggest for tech hiring
in general? And so on. Fortunately, this speculation was largely ill-informed,
for two reasons.

First, I made the decision to join VectorWare a few weeks ago, but it took some
time for the paperwork to be completed and things organised enough for a public
announcement.

Second, I was lucky enough to be contacted by a *lot* of people who were
interested in possibly hiring me. I won't try to draw any conclusions from this
about finding Rust jobs in general, because I am fortunate to have an atypical
level of experience and prominence when it comes to Rust. However, it did
demonstrate that Rust is being used in an impressive range of areas.

Specifically, Rust is being used for: operating systems, compilers/interpreters,
wasm, GPU programming, quantum computing, databases, data analytics,
networking/cloud/server, medical, space, defence, automotive, embedded,
security software, malware detection, search, formal methods, CAD, devtools,
collaborative software, device management, real-time systems, prediction
markets, biotech, identity verification, document generation, hardware
simulation, and software modernization. (And also generative AI,
cryptocurrencies/blockchain, and algorithmic trading; I did receive a few
messages relating to these despite saying I didn't want to work on them.) Rust
is being used by huge companies, tiny startups, and everything between.

This is a really encouraging sign! I knew Rust was doing well, but I didn't
know it was doing *this* well.

Searching for a new job is never a fun or easy exercise, but this time it was
about as good as it gets. Many thanks to everyone who helped: those who
contacted me with interest, those who passed news of my availability along, and
those who pointed me at Rust opportunities they were aware of. I appreciate it.
I can now get to work on the new stuff and go back to pretending that LinkedIn
doesn't exist.
