---
layout: post
title: "A home free from fossil fuels"
---

My house is now free from the direct burning of fossil fuels. Here's how I did
it.

## Car

In March 2021 I replaced my old car with a Tesla Model 3. At that time the
range of electric vehicles available in Australia was meagre and the Model 3
was an easy choice. It has been great. It's fast, quiet, smooth, and reliable.
I love [one-pedal
driving](https://www.racv.com.au/royalauto/transport/electric-vehicles/what-is-one-pedal-driving-explained.html).
I haven't paid for petrol in four years. I don't want to ever own an ICE car
again.

I charge it from a normal power point in my garage. It takes more than 24 hours
to fully charge the battery from empty, but that's a rare use case for me.
Topping up 20-50% overnight is much more common. You can get a special home
charger that's 3.5x faster but I haven't bothered. My model has an [LFP
battery](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lithium_iron_phosphate_battery) which
tolerates being charged to 100% regularly, which I like a lot. Charging at home
is fantastic, and if you don't have some kind of off-street parking (garage,
carport, or even just a small driveway) that allows this, an EV is a lot less
enticing.

I also mostly do city driving. I have used Tesla superchargers on longer drives
a few times. This has worked fine, but there aren't that many of them around
and it could be inconvenient if I did lots of long country drives.

Maintenance-wise it's a dream. Do you know how complicated internal combustion
engines are? How many moving parts they have? Electric motors are trivial in
comparison. No sparkplugs, belts, chains, or pistons. No transmission! (And no
transmission hump in the floor.) I've never seen my car's motor. It's not
accessible, because it doesn't need to be. There is no regular motor
maintenance to be done by the owner. No changing the oil, no topping up the
radiator. Tyres and windscreen wipers are the main things that need attention.
Even brake pads and brake fluid last much longer than ICE cars because
regenerative braking does 99% of the job when slowing down.

It doesn't have full self-driving because (a) I wouldn't trust that, and
(b) it's not legal in Australia.

Unfortunately, over the past four years Elon Musk has gone from "distasteful"
to "serious candidate for worst person in the world". My car now has a sticker
that says "I bought this before we learned Elon was crazy". The very first day
the sticker was applied I got a yell of approval about it from another Tesla
driver. Even though this car has been great for me I wouldn't buy another Tesla
now, because of the brand association and the [general
direction](https://bsky.app/profile/nnethercote.bsky.social/post/3lavhdxdj4223)
of the company. I also don't want to sell it, because it's working well for me,
and I hate buying and selling cars, and it's not obvious what non-Tesla EV
is the best alternative. Hrmph.

## Hot water

Two years ago I replaced my gas hot water tank with a [Reclaim
Energy](https://reclaimenergy.com.au/) one that uses an electric heat pump. It
was pretty straightforward and the new tank has worked flawlessly.

I was always slightly terrified by just how intense the old gas tank's flames
were, that "whoosh" sound when it kicked in, and I've never liked the idea of a
pilot light that was always burning. The new tank doesn't feel like it could
one day accidentally blow my house up. That's a nice feeling.

## Stove top

Shortly after I replaced the hot water tank I replaced my gas stove top with an
Asko electric induction stove top. This required running a new electrical
circuit to the kitchen. Fortunately the fusebox had enough capacity so it
wasn't a big deal.

Induction cooking takes a little getting used to and I had to replace some
aluminium pots and pans with steel ones, but now I really like it. It can
produce prodigious amounts of heat, even more than the old gas wok burner.

It is also an absolute dream to clean. I wipe it down in a few seconds every
time after cooking. Compare that with the old gas stove top which I would clean
half-heartedly about once a week and properly about once a quarter. I don't
miss those filthy metal rings and grates.

I also don't miss the air pollutants from burning gas inside a house. Did you
know that [12% of childhood asthma in Australia can be attributed to the use of
gas stoves for
cooking?](https://www.nationalasthma.org.au/living-with-asthma/resources/patients-carers/factsheets/gas-stoves-and-asthma-in-children)
The history of the study of air pollution on human health is basically a
never-ending cycle of scientists concluding "it's even worse than we thought".

## Heating

Last month I replaced the house's heating and cooling system. I had a ducted
system with a gas heater and an add-on air conditioner. It was fifteen years
old and the air conditioner broke down irreparably. My house has some
*interesting* space constraints and I received some opinions that I should
switch to per-room split systems but I ended up choosing a ducted Daikin heat
pump (a.k.a. reverse-cycle air conditioner) that heats and cools. Technology
has come along nicely here: the new unit is more powerful but also quieter than
the old system; it can run at multiple speeds instead of just being fully on or
off; and it's smaller, so I have a little more space along the side of the
house.

## Bits and pieces 

I have made a request with the gas company to disconnect my house from the gas
network and remove the gas meter. It should be done within a couple of weeks.
My contribution to the [gas death
spiral](https://reneweconomy.com.au/gas-network-death-spiral-pressure-mounts-to-protect-consumers-from-cost-of-stranded-assets/).

I do still have one fossil fuel device: a barbecue powered by a gas bottle. But
that barbecue gets used about twice a year and probably accounts for about
0.01% of the fossil fuels that were used by the old car, stove top, hot water
tank, and heater, so I'm happy to treat it as a rounding error and declare
victory.

You might be wondering about the usual question: how is the electricity used by
these new machines generated? Before I answer that, note that these kinds of
electric machines are generally less polluting even when run on electricity
generated entirely from fossil fuels, because they are so much more
energy-efficient. E.g. an EV typically converts more than 90% of energy in the
battery into kinetic energy; the corresponding figure for an ICE car is more
like 25-30%. Heat pumps and induction stove tops are also extremely efficient.

Fortunately, my situation is much better than that baseline. First, I have a
small (2 KW) solar panel system that covers some of my electricy usage. Beyond
that, most of my electricity does come from the grid, but [more than 40% of
Australia's electricity supply is now
renewable](https://cleanenergycouncil.org.au/news-resources/emissions-reductions-renewables).
That proportion has tripled in less than ten years, and the federal government
has a [target of 82% renewables by
2030](https://www.energycouncil.com.au/analysis/the-82-per-cent-national-renewable-energy-target-where-did-it-come-from-and-how-can-we-get-there/)
which appears to be more or less on target. So these new machines will become
less polluting as time goes on.

Replacing any large machine is always a pain, but it's worth noting that, *even
if you ignore the environmental side of things*, the new electric machines are
all better than the old fossil fuel machines they replace: quieter, safer,
smoother, and cheaper to run. No hair shirts required.

Saul Griffith's [The Big Switch: Australia's Electric
Future](https://www.amazon.com.au/Big-Switch-Australias-Electric-Future/dp/1760643874)
is an excellent resource for anyone wanting to learn more about
electrification.
